
                                                     J3/98-114

To:         J3
From:       Robert Paul Corbett
Subject:    Fortran 95 Request for Interpretation
Date:       31 January 1998


Sections 12.2.1.1 and 12.2.2 of the Fortran 95 standard
define rules for dummy arguments and function returns in the
presence of explicit interfaces that allow array bounds
expressions to be evaluated on either the calling side or
the called side of a call.  The interpretation provided for
RFI 000049 on the X3J3 website clarifies and reinforces the
conditions that permit evaluation on either side of the
call.  The erratum published in the same file for RFI 000070
changes the semantics of dummy arguments.  The erratum does
not explicitly mention function results, but it might be
considered to imply a similar change to the semantics of
function results.

The erratum provided for RFI 000070 refers to altered text
for the interpretation provided for RFI 000049.  The version
of the interpretation that appears in the file on the X3J3
website does not contain the altered text.

The definition of characteristics of function results as
stated in Section 12.2.2 of the Fortran 95 standard permits
more efficient implementation of array-valued functions, at
least for some architectures, than the definition implied by
the erratum provided for RFI 000070.  For Sun, it is more
efficient for the calling routines to allocate space for
array results than to have the called routines allocate the
space.  In order for the calling routine to allocate space
for an array result, it must know the size of the array.
To determine the size of the array, it must evaluate the
array bounds expressions given in the explicit interface
for the function.

Section 12.2.2 of the Fortran 95 standard requires the
values of the nonconstant bounds expressions given in an
explicit interface to be the same as the values of the
bounds expressions given in the corresponding function
definition.  Thus, the values of the nonconstant bounds
expressions used to determine the size of the array result
can be passed to the called routine, avoiding any need for
the called routine to re-evaluate those expressions.
Because Fortran 95 allows user-defined routines to appear
in bounds expressions, evaluating the bounds expressions
more than once per call could prove inefficient and
confusing.

The change implied by the erratum provided for RFI 000070
would remove the nonconstant bounds expressions from the
characteristics of function results.  The shape would still
be a characteristic, but the same shape can be produced by
many different values of the bounds expressions.  Thus,
the values of the nonconstant bounds expressions used in
the called routine may differ from the values of the
corresponding expressions in the explicit interface.

For example, consider the explicit interface

      INTERFACE
        FUNCTION FOO(F, G, H)
          INTERFACE
            PURE INTEGER FUNCTION F()
            END FUNCTION
            PURE INTEGER FUNCTION G()
            END FUNCTION
            PURE INTEGER FUNCTION H()
            END FUNCTION
          END INTERFACE
          CHARACTER*(F()) FOO(G():H())
        END FUNCTION
      END INTERFACE

The definition given in Section 12.2.2 of the Fortran 95
standard requires the values of the length and bounds
expressions in the interface to be the same as the values
of the corresponding length and bounds expressions in the
function definition.

Under the definition implied by the erratum provided for
RFI 000070, the shapes must match, but the values of the
nonconstant bounds expressions need not.  Thus, the
function definition might be

      FUNCTION FOO(F, G, H)
        INTERFACE
          PURE INTEGER FUNCTION F()
          END FUNCTION
          PURE INTEGER FUNCTION G()
          END FUNCTION
          PURE INTEGER FUNCTION H()
          END FUNCTION
        END INTERFACE
        CHARACTER*(F()) FOO(G()-1:H()-1)
        . . .
      END FUNCTION

In this case, the values of the bounds expressions used in
the called routine must be the values of the expressions
specified in the function definition, not the values of the
expressions specified in the interface block.

Question:  If a bound of a function result array is not
           a constant expression, is the exact dependence
           on the entities in the expression a
           characteristic of the function result?
